AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Recording and…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Healthcare and… So, in Hebrew, we also have a special case of tokenization.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Later, we'll talk about sequences and the architectures that support sequences.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: mainly RNN, recurrent Neural Network.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And finally, we'll speak about the attention mechanism, which, as I said, is very relevant for the transformer architecture.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, let's begin.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And we'll start by, talking about tokenization. So, from now on forward.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We won't say words anymore, we'll start speaking about tokens.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And let's see what I mean. So, we already, talked about embeddings, and how we can represent a word
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: In a vector form that captures semantics, syntactics, any form of knowledge we wanted to obtain.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So this is the pipeline that we saw so far, I would say. We have the raw text.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: this raw text goes through a pre-processing phase, which, here is called standardization. So here, for example, they decided to remove punctuation.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Some other things we want to do in the preprocessing is called lemmatization, is taking the verb to its raw form, so instead of going.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: The verb will be, mapped to the raw form of go.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, the standardization varies, of course, depending on your end goal.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Sometimes we leave the raw text as is, okay? So this step is not mandatory, and it's really case-dependent.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Then we broke it down into words. These were our tokens, so we broke it down into words.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And each index was mapped to some vector encoding.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Now, I want to propose two different methods of tokenization, and ask you to think about the trade-offs between the two.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, for example, the sentence, it, it, it is rainy.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I can break it down to character-level tokenization, so each character will be its own token. Think about it, each character will have its own embedding.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So in our case, IT, capital IT IS, etc, and dot. And word-level tokenization, which is what we did so far, will break down this sentence into, it is raining, and the period at the end.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, what do you think?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Is the trade-off?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Between, a very long, Character-level tokenization to award-level tokenization.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Emm… Yes.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Great. So, first of all, we lose semantic meaning. The word… the… token S.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: obviously has no general meaning I can generalize throughout the whole English language.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So I lose meaning working, character level, something else that comes into your mind?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Sorry?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Vocabulary size. Which vocabulary size will be much larger?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: The word-level tokenization's vocabulary will be much larger, obviously, because every word in the English language will have its own token. Something else you can think about?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Great, so out of vocabulary words handling, you can do very well with character-level tokenization. You cannot do very well with word-level tokenization.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I think you covered at least most of the essentials, so let's see together.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: First of all, the sequence length with character-level tokenization is much longer, okay? So, look at our sentence here.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Here, our word-level tokenization had 4 tokens, and in the character 11 tokenization, how much did we have? 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12… 12 tokens.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Remember that when we're working with LLMs, we pay per token, we do calculations per token. So having a long tokenization
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: It's more costly, okay?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: vocabulary size, you mentioned. With character level, it's very small. With word level, it's very, very large. Semantic, you also mentioned, no built-in semantic when we do character level tokenization, but we do have,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: some semantics already when we tokenize per word. Out of vocabulary also mentioned there is no out-of-vocabulary problem with character-level tokenization, but there is when we do word-level tokenization.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: morphology and spelling, what if there are misspelling or some new morphology? So character level handles it naturally?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And world-level tokenization doesn't handle it naturally. If I now misspearse something, it's an unknown token, and I don't know what to do with it.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Aside from mapping it to the unknown token. Training efficiency, so character level, we said it's much more expensive, it's much slower, because the document is mapped to a very long sequence. And word-level tokenization is much more efficient.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, what do we do in real life? Neither, okay? We have some better solutions.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: what if I propose to you some sub-word-level tokenization? For instance, the sentence, it is raining, to split it to, it is rain, and ING, which is a very common grammatical
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: how do you say it? Postfix? Suffix?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: in English, and this is what we aim to achieve.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: when I will now show you the three algorithms of tokenization, to break down into not as small pieces as character, which are meaningless, make a very long sequence, very hard to work with.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: But not as short as words, which don't handle out of vocabulary, have a harder time to generalize.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, we will try to find this middle solution here, okay?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So we'll see 3 algorithms type, BPE, byte-pair encoding.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: word piece and sentence piece, okay? They all want to achieve what we saw earlier, which is how to tokenize a…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: the training data in the most efficient way, and each one of them defines efficiency differently, okay?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, let's start with BP. So, BPE, this is the pseudocode.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We start with all characters in the training data as our base tokens. So we start
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: With breaking down the entire training data into
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: the characters, so the… the… like, we saw that it is raining, the 12 characters, this is what we start with, and then we… for each K… one of the K steps.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We look at the training data, we tokenize the data based on the vocabulary.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And then we count the frequency of the adjacent token pair in the data, and the most frequent pair is our winner.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And it joins… the vocabulary.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And once it joins the vocabulary, in the next step, I will try to tokenize the training data using the longest
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: token.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, this is the algorithm. I know it doesn't sit perfectly, so let's see it with an example, and this example will make our lives much easier.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, let's say I have this vocabulary.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: A very simple one, a mock one, of course. It has 10 times the word hug.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: 5 times the word PUG, 12th times the word pun.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: 4 times the word bun, and five times the word hugs. Okay, so this is our entire training set.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And we are setting in advance a hyperparameter of what will be my final vocabulary size.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And my final vocabulary size, I want it to be size of 10.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Okay?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, what do we start with?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: characters, right? So, to map all the characters here, and this is what we do. So, we look at all the characters, and in the first step, we have,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Sorry, I… I skipped it, but we have H-U-G, N?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: B?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: and S, okay? So this is our vocabulary. What is its size? 1, 2, 3… 4…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: It counts with me, see? 7, right? Okay, so our vocabulary size is 7, so 7 out of the 10 we already, we filled, okay? So we filled already 7 tokens out of the 10 tokens we want in our final vocabulary.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And now, the question is, what will be the three additional tokens that will make it into our vocabulary?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Now, when we tokenize our training data based on our new vocabulary, we get that. We get HUG 10 times, PUG 5 times.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yeah, but they can read.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yeah, I won't point. HUG 10 times, PUG 5 times, PUN 5… 12 times BUN 4 times, and HUGS, 5 times.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, for example, the pair UG, let's count all the pairs, all the possible pairs out here, and the pair UG
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: is present 20 times in the corpus, okay? So if I were to count the pair UG, where do I see it? I see it in hugs, right? 10 times. I see it in pugs 5 times, and I see it in hugs 5 times. So the total appearances of the pair UG
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: is 20 times, and you can test me, but there is no more frequent pair than this pair in our dataset. And therefore, the token that now made it into my vocabulary is the pair UG. So, the first
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: merge rule.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: that is learned by the tokenizer is UG, the two letters U and G, combined to the string UG, okay?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, now you can see above that the vocabulary is the same 7 letters we had before, same 7 characters, and the additional string, UG.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Now, I want to, again, tokenize my vocabulary. How do I do it according to the pseudocode? I always look for, first, the longest
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: token possible. So, our longest token possible is UG, and therefore, now HUG is split into just two tokens, H and UG.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: P and UG is split to 5 tokens, to 2 tokens, P and UG. PUN is still 3 tokens, BUN is still 3 tokens, and HUGS also is split into 3 tokens instead of 4.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And now, if you understood the methodology, please try to answer in the QR code in the slides.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: What should be our next merge rule? Should it be?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: UN2 tokens to one UN, or H-U-G into HUG.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And remember, We're looking for the most frequent pair.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Okay, so the correct answer that most of you got right is that we should now add the merge rule, that U, the characters U and Ed should merge together to UN, and let's see why.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: so, congratulations to the people who… wow, you, like, you have an accumulative leaderboard?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: A nice movie.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, let's see why.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: The pair UN appeared 16 times, where did it appear? In pan, 12 times, and in Ban.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Four times, so we have a total of 16.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And the pairs H and UG appeared, 15 times
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: 10 times in the word hug, and 5 times in the word hugs. And therefore, the pair that made it into our vocabulary is you.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So we repeat this process, and the final vocabulary we obtain using BPE with the size of 10 is this.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Okay? And these will be our tokens.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, this was BPE.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: how will it look like in inference time? Okay, so now this is my vocabulary.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So the word bug, for example, will be broken down into… again, we're looking for the longest possible string, and then we go to the shorter ones. So we'll be broken down into B and UG.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Mug, however, will be tokenized into unknown, and U-U-G-Y unknown instead of M.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I don't have it in my vocabulary, okay?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And now, let's see that you understood me, so how will the word tag will be tokenized?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And I'll go… scan the QR, and then I'll go to the… Bored.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Today, my questions are relatively easy, but next week, I'll make a much harder one.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Now that I see you have a leaderboard.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Piano taco recouva.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Back on the… Alright, stuck on the next one, maybe now it works?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yeah?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Start.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Great. No, questions later. So, great, you got it right. It will be broken down to unknown, because we don't have the T character, and hug is the longest string, therefore this is the right answer.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, great work, everyone. I'll take questions soon, but as reminding you that we'll have a methodology… afterka methodologic for questions, okay? Soon.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So you got it right, it will be tokenized to unknown and hacked.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, now I want to show you two additional algorithms, and then we'll have a break for a question.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, WordPiece. WordPiece…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: is very similar to BPE, but the criteria to make it into our vocabulary is not the most frequent pair.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: But rather,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: it computes a score for each pair that is based on the likelihood. How does it define likelihood?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: It takes the frequency of the pair.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And divides it by the frequency of the first element times the frequency of the second element.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Meaning that…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: if the pair itself is very frequent, but each character on its own is very frequent, it's not as powerful a token than if the pair is very frequent compared to each of the characters on their own. Okay, so this is the formula.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Again, the frequency of the pair together divided by the frequency of each alone.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Another difference that I want you to notice, that in WordPiece, we differentiate between a letter at the beginning of the word and a letter in the middle of the word. And how do we indicate that the letter is following a different letter? It's by using the two
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Esula mi.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Hashtags, the two hashtags before the character, okay? So,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: H and hashtag, hashtag H will have different, tokens, representations. So,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Now, I will ask you the last mintimeter question of today. What is the score of the most frequent pair? So, notice that this was our first merger with BPE. U and G becoming UG.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And I want to ask you what is the score according to the likelihood?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Of this, pair.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, you, I'll go to the mintimeter.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: First, we'll see the… Oh, Uri, makara!
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: You're still at the top, I'm happy.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Okay.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, okay, let's do the last, quiz of today…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: M… Everyone… Okay, everyone's ready?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Start.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Don't use the LLMs back home.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Sorry? The formula?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Here, if you need the formula again… Sorry.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: The data. Yeah, it's harder here. Sorry.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Okay, so, half of you got it right. Not half, less than half, but percent of.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Okay, let's see why. It was a bit difficult here in the class, because,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I didn't show the data, neither the formula. So, why did it happen? So, the most frequent pair, UG, is present 20 times. We counted them also before, if you remember.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: But the individual frequency of U is very high, so U appears 10 plus 5 plus 12 plus 4 plus 5. It appears
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: 36 times.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And the character G appears 20 times, and therefore we have 20 divided by 20 times 36,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So the score is 1 divided by 36. So notice that with WordPiece, the first merge rule that made it into the vocabulary is not actually combining U and G.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: But rather, the best… and actually, every… all the pairs with you, specifically in our vocabulary, have the same score of 1 divided by 36, so the first module will not be with you, and the pairs that made it, if you look at all the possible permutations.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: the only one that doesn't have U in it, and this is our first module, G and S becoming GGS.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And, and, if we, we continue, to the…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Next iteration, now we have in our vocabulary the additional token GS, and therefore the word hugs and hug will be tokenized differently, and we'll repeat the process again until we meet our final vocabulary size, which is a hyperparameter.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So this is WordPiece.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And now, let's see our last algorithm, which is called sentence piece.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Sendant space works a bit differently, kind of the other way around.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: It starts with a huge vocabulary, And gradually removes unnecessary tokens.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: How does it form this initial vocabulary? By using the methods we saw earlier, BPE, WordPress, or other methods we haven't discussed today.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And after it has this initial vocabulary,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: It starts removing the… the tokens.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, how do we decide what to move? We have a certain loss on our training data.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And we estimate how much the last will increase if we remove a certain token.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And the token that hurt it the least, the loss function, is now removed from the vocabulary.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So let's eat in our example.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So now, let's say we started with this large vocabulary of 20 tokens.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And the question is which one will be removed, PU or HUG? Of course, technically, we need to go through all the possibilities here in order to understand which token to remove.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: But I narrowed it down for the sake of learning to two possibilities of removing tokens.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, what do we do? We calculate the loss function, and which loss function do we use?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: The negative log likelihood, when did we see this loss function?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Logistic regression, perfect. So, we said that the negative log likelihood is a special case of cross-entropy.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, it's all related.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, we look at the negative log likelihood, which is the log of the probability of the token, of the word, sorry, of the word tokenized by our vocabulary.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And now we can see, for example, that the score for our vocabulary, hug, pug, pan, band, and hugs.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: using…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I'm using now the full vocabulary I have in my hand that I started with. So I take, for example, the word hug.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Its score is 0.071.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Or, this is the probability of this token.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And how do I calculate the loss of it? I plug it into minus the log of the probability.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: and times 10, because it appears 10 times in my vocabulary, and I repeat this for every one, single one of my words, and I end up with 169.8.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And now, I want to calculate
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: How much milkma loss increase if I remove the
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: either PU or a… or a hug.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, and… So, PUG…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: could be tokenized with P and UG with the same score, so…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Here, we, tokenize it by PU and then G, because we start, right to left when we do the tokenization. But notice that removing the token PU
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Will,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: still, I will tokenize with two tokens, and actually, if you calculate the score, the score will remain the same.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And therefore, if it gives the exact same loss, probably this is the candidate we will get rid of. But on the other hand, if we remove HAG,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: it will make the loss worse, because now HAG will be broken down into H, U, and G, which will increase my score.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: sorry, decrease my score and increase my loss, and HUGS will also be broken down into those two tokens. So before, the score of HUGS was 0.0017.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And now, the score still remains the same, but because the square of hugs decreased, the loss finally increased.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And therefore, the token that we will remove first is PU, because it didn't hurt our loss function.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And how many repetitions will we do until we're happy? We defined the vocabulary size as a hyperparameter, and this is what we will
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, just reality on the sizes of, and tokens that actually happen. So, first of all, we have special tokens that we often add to the vocabulary, such as the unknown token.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: To map to unknown things we will see in our inference time.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We add the end of sentence token, which identifies that the sentence has ended, because notice that a period is not necessarily an end of sentence.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And in some models, such as BERT, we add CLS token at the beginning of the sentence, which is a token that we use for classification tasks later on in the pipeline.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And a common vocabulary size for tokenization is usually around 32,000 to 64,000.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: tokens?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Depending, of course, if it's multilingual or not.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Mmm…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So now I just want to, yeah, to compare the three methods we saw, and then we'll pause for questions.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, we saw a BPA word piece and sentence piece.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Tenten space.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And the primary mechanism of BPE was to look at frequent pair.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And word piece was to maximize the likelihood. And in sentence piece, we started with a primary mechanism, which is
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: something else, for instance, BPE, how did we handle…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So notice that both in BP and WordPiece, we started by this assumption that we break down the sentence into words by using a space. So we look at the spaces in the document, and we have broken it down into words.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: With sentence piece, we start working with the raw text. So the space itself is also a character that is taken into account when we do a sentence piece.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: The spaces, as we said, with BP and WordPiece, they're handled in the input, and in sentence piece, they're treated as their own character.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Key use cases we didn't discuss. So, BP is, as far as we know, is the tokenization method for GPT, and also was for Roberta.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: the first GPT, yeah? Wordpiece is used by Bert.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And sentence piece is used by T5, and was used by… in Exenith and Albert.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: BPA and sentence visits are usually not language agnostic.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: But sentence piece does not take into account the language, although I will say that BP and WordPiece can handle multilingual inputs.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: It's just very hard when the characters are similar between different languages.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So now, I'll pause for questions.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yes.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So the question was, how do we handle with word, piece, and sentence piece, typos?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, first of all, great question. In general, I would say that in tokenization, what we want to achieve
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: is, for example, remember the reigning, the ING ending?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: If someone misspelled the…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: rain, the token rain, I can still know that it's a verb with an ending ING, because I broke down this full word into several tokens. So, generally speaking, for all of the methods, the way it handles misspelling is by the fact that a word is not
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: fully mapped to a token. Once a word is fully mapped to a token.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: It's hard to catch those misspellings, unless they are very common in the vocabulary to begin with, and have won their own.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Token, which is… which is sometimes a case that happens.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yes.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Great question. So the question was, how do we handle numbers?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, notice… that L&Ms are very bad
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Poor, terrible at handling numbers because
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: what is a number to an LLM? It's a… it's an accumulation of characters, right?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, the primary answer is that LLMs are not very good at numbers and capturing the meaning of numbers, and I think one of the first things that ChatGPT did, for instance, is to understand that if there is a mathematical calculation involved.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: send it to Python, send it to a calculator, don't do it within the LLM, because all the LLM does is memorize
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: those numbers?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: and it's true that if some… I don't have something on the top of my head, but some sentences are very common in a language with numbers, so it will know to
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Fill those numbers, or 1 plus 1 equals 2 is something that you will see maybe a lot in your training data, so it will know that this is the next character that should appear.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: But it… the capture of semantics of numbers is a… Challenge.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Not only that, by the way, not just numbers, also adjectives, like,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: you can… you can say… I'm leaking, so I will put it on site. Yes, and then I'll take something from the Zoom.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yes.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Okay, so notice that at the end of this process, if our vocabulary is large enough.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: A lot of our tokens will be a full word.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, the mock examples I showed you, it's very small, and the number of characters to begin with was very small, but imagine that now you start with the Hebrew language, and you have only 22 characters, but you're now building a vocabulary of 32K,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: You will end up with a lot of words, full words, and a lot of morphologies and syntactics that will help you also build additional words.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: sex,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, the question is, why not take, like, the full Vocabulary in our training data.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: This is… maybe I'm rephrasing your question. So we can do that, but what we saw, the downside of doing it, the downside of doing it is that you cannot capture out of vocabulary unseen things. You cannot
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Generalize Well enough, and at the end, It, it,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: you capture a meaning, for example, the ending ING.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: You can capture a much broader meaning by breaking it to this token.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yeah, this is, this is the…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And you have a lot of those stuff. Think about medical words, so…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Psychiatrist, then toddlogist, the ending east, for example, English. You have many of those also in the Hebrew language, in every language, that imply something on semantics.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: But it's not a full word.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I can bring me… I can maybe send later more examples, so it will… I'm just taking a few questions from the…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: zoom?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Wow.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Which one should I take, Pinnie?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Wow, you might have… So I randomly picked, is there a generic metric for assigning?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: the compression ratio of a tokenization vocab. Yeah, is there a downside for compressing the vocab too much? Great question.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, yes, we, we usually do look at the median and mean size of our,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: sequence length. So, at the end.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: As we said, a smaller sequence, reduces cost.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And captures, maybe, the meaning,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Differently, but mainly saves cost, so we do look at the sequence length.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And we do look how many out of vocabulary.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Tokens have been created.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: there will always be some out of vocabulary, but we don't want it to be the main part of our tokenization. I will soon show you Matan in the next slide, how they did it in a certain paper.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And I'm picking the next question randomly. Is sentence piece start off from either BP or WordPiece? How does it achieve language agnostic characteristics?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, it doesn't only start from BP and WordPiece, it can also start from unigrams. Remember what we learned in our first lesson together? And the way it achieves language agnostic characteristics
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: It's because it doesn't take into… break down the words into spaces to begin with, and then it can capture context switches from one language
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: to another.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Okay, so I will continue because,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Otherwise, we will just answer questions, although, you have very good questions, so it makes me want to go on. Okay, so…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I want to show you, for example.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: a paper that talked about tokenization in healthcare, so one of the questions, I think, in our first class together was, no, when do you start from scratch and do the full tokenization yourself? Or when do you fine-tune an existing LLM, which we'll learn how we do next week?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And I think this paper…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Kind of explains the importance of tokenization in certain domains.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, for example, the healthcare domain.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So what do you see here? Let me remove the… R?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So you see, here a lot of types of medical terms.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Drugs, genes, diseases, organs, etc.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And, let's look at two different models, because I'm not very familiar with SCBERT, but PubMedBERT and BERT.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, what is the main difference between the two?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Bert!
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: was the training of the tokenization, so notice I'm just talking about the tokenization itself. The algorithms we just saw, was done on the full internet, so books, Wikipedia, etc.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: PubMedBert, their model, this paper's model, was trained on,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: PubMed, which is, is like the archive of medical papers.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: It was trained on medical papers, and what is the difference? That, for example, diabetes was something that was also seen enough in the training data of the general internet to have its own token.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: and also in PubMed BERT, but for hypertension, when we talk about BERT, it was split into two tokens of hyper.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: intention.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And in PubMed Bert, it was just one token.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: In… let's take another example. Sorry if there is a doctor here or a medical person, sorry about that, but in birth, it was split to 6 different tokens, which, as you understand it.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Impossible to capture meaning in those 6 tokens, like, it's… What is this?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And with PubMedBERT, it's one token, so the content of your training data has a huge impact on how the tokenization will look like.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And again, why do we care if I'm now in the healthcare domain, and I'm building models, LLMs for the healthcare domain? Why do I care that those words will have their own token and will make it into my list? Because, for one.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: it will be easier to capture meaning of them. Look at the example of this drug.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And for two, it will cost me much, much less, because now my sequence will be much shorter, it will be easier for me to train, it will be easier for me to do inference, and so…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And now it goes to Matan's question, so how… how did they measure it? So one of the things they do.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Is the comparison of the average input length
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: In WordPiece, they use the words piece, using general domain versus in-domain vocabulary, and we can see that the sequences in all of the data sets here, so all of the rows here are different data sets.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: All of the vocabulary has shortened majorically, so it's very good for a training and inference process if you are a medical company now specializing in the healthcare domain.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: M… Another, very interesting, problem is Hebrew, or all, Safot Chemio, the Shemic languages.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, why is our language so special? Because we have morphologies. What do I mean by morphologies?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: For example, the word in Hebrew, bet, tzaddiklame, Can mean either onion, batza.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Or it can mean batzel. What is batzel? In the shade. So, in Hebrew, we… Connect characters together.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And it's… it's making,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: the word is… has an additional meaning to it. It's… it's… you just added one character, and it became, instead of shade, in the shade. And it makes much, much harder to analyze a Hebrew language.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, this is a paper, from the lab of Rutsa Fati. She's an amazing professor at Barilan.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Which, is working a lot on Hebrew.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And what did they show you here?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Different types of tokenization, so the classical, word peace tokenization.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So you can see, four words in Hebrew and their translation. So, shihu, liberation, ves.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And, the word piece, tokenization, you can see, for example, it broke down
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: The oak… oak cha…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: and who? Because, shin in Hebrew can mean, diff… it's… here it's part of the,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: of the… Base of the verb.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And it was added to the wrong side of the tokenization.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And when you do either morphological or prefix-suffle tokenization.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: You can see that it's much better, specifically when you are referring to a morphology, and you break it down to the choresh of the verb. Shoresh is, like, the three letters in Hebrew that define every verb.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, again, the importance of tokenization in different languages, that you need to understand the language and how it works to tokenize better. It's not just applying statistical algorithms all the time.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Emm… So, how did they measure their success? It goes back also to Matan's question.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So they looked at the end task, at the final task at the end.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And, they compared, on different data sets, the performance of their tokenization versus a word piece or prefix suffix tokenization. And we can see that, it did, in most of the data set.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: It was the best, performing method.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: In terms of final performance on the task.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: M… Let me look at the time.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Right? Okay, so, let's do a 10-minute break.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And… and come back here at 10.30.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Okay, so, welcome back from the break.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And I want to show you a Hugging Face Habit tokenizer playground, where you can choose
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: the LLM's tokenizer, so, for example, GPT-4.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And I wrote, welcome back, NEVI students, and let's see how GPT-4 tokenizes the input.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So welcome, you can see, have its own token.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: back also, students also, an exclamation point, but as expected, or not, nebus, you need to have your own token next to LM.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, NEVUS is broken down here into two tokens. I guess it was not seen enough in the vocabulary.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And therefore, it was… it's broken down into token, and I can even see the token IDs here.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And why is it exposed? It's not because OpenAI and Google loves us so much, because we pay per token, so we have to know what's going on. For example, T5, that we said T5 is using which tokenization, do you remember?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Sentence piece?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So you can see here that also welcome back, students, an exclamation point and end of sentence have their own token, and Nebius is broken down into multiple tokens.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: What else do you want to see?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: UPT3?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Claude Apple? Claude.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So similar.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And here you can see, I think it's nice to test the…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Different types of models and how they, tokenize your inputs.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Do you have it in this slide?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And let's see…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: a small code example. So, obviously, you can write the tokenization yourself from scratch, but not too, because Hugging Face holds a lot of tokenizers under the library called Tokenizers.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, for example, if we want to tokenize now with the BPE, and this is my corpus, I love natural language processing, tokenization is important, and BPE builds subord units.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Mmm… No brainwash here.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, how do we… how do we tokenize? We initialize the token… the tokenizer.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: and we give it a type BPE, and notice that we also choose how will the unknown token look like.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And we do pre-tokenization by breaking it into words by using the white space.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So we said that with BPA and WordPiece, we need this preprocessing of breaking it into words.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And then we initialize the BPE trainer.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We give it the special tokens as well, and the vocabulary size, the final vocabulary size we want to have.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And now we train it, we give it the corpus and the trainer.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And now the tokenizer is ready to work to do inference, so if, for example, I encode unhappiness.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: My output token will be probably on… Happy in this, but… M…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I also do have, actually, a notebook to… if you want to see the full writing BPE from scratch, and WordPiece from scratch, so I'll upload it later today.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And now, before I move to sequences, I will also leave you room for additional questions.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Emm… We still have.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I'll start with the chat this time.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: M…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, how do we decide on the vocab size?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, as we said, the vocabulary size is a hyperparameter.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And at the end, we have all of these different metrics to test if our tokenization is good. If we have a final task at the end, we'll evaluate the performance on the final task.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We can evaluate the sequence length, we can evaluate perplexity, depending on our use case.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And I'll take another random question here.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: how is WordPiece done at scale? The corpus is quite large. Do you calculate the count probability on everything? So yeah, notice, by the way, that all of our algorithms we saw here, they require heavy computational…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: time… And, not effort, but maybe time. But you do it in the…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: before you train an LLM, so you do it once, you have now… this is your vocabulary and your tokens, and at inference time, it's just 01 to look in the dictionary… not O1, O of the vocabulary, to look in the dictionary and to find the relevant embedding.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: But, because, tokenization is not a rep, repetitive process.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: then I'm at least not familiar with some optimizations work to make it faster.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Any questions from the audience here? Yes.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yeah.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So in… to use a new tokenization, yeah, So the question is why… whether,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: if I can use a tokenization in an existing model, and the answer is that if you want to create
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: A model with a new tokenization, you need to train
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: From scratch, because it's a very initial step of the model.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And the… and, yeah, the… Yes.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Good question. So the question is, do… when the vocabulary changes, like, do I need to repeat the full algorithms
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: from scratch, or can I extend?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: On the existing, vocabulary.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Let me think about it, because I haven't thought about it before.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Mmm… I mean…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: it will be suboptimal, because the algorithms are greedy. So BPE, all of them, word piece and sentence, they are greedy, they're starting to look for the most frequent pair, or the most likely pair, or remove the one that hurts the loss the least.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: It cannot be extrapolated to receive the optimum, at least.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: By looking at just the additional vocabulary. So if… because they're greedy, you need to start them from scratch.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: But… so the question was, maybe the last one, because we start with a large vocabulary and then you remove it, it's easier to extrapolate, but still, you might have removed
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: tokens that now became very frequent. So, it's not you cannot… you can do it, it's just not necessarily that your tokenization would be optimal. And if, as the previous question said, you go back to training a full model from scratch.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I guess you will just repeat the step of tokenization and won't, neglect.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Okay.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, now we… we talked about tokens, and as we said, from now on,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Everything we will mention as an input will be token level, and every embedding will be mapped to a token and not to a word.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I want to talk about architectures that are relevant for sequences.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Still not our promised transformer, But, next lesson, we will get there.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, if you remember, last week, we talked about the limitation of a neural network when we have a varying length of input.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And we kind of found a lot of tricks to handle this problem.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: But there are architectures that organically handle the fact that the input is of various lengths.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: For example, remember our sentiment classification task? I can have reviews on Airbnb that are 500 words, and I can have reviews of one word. And I want to handle all those various inputs.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: nicely. On top of it, at inference time, I can have even longer inputs that I've seen in the trains.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: What are sequences? For example, text. Okay, so we said text, and we said this text will be broken down into tokens, not character-level tokens, but sorry, this is the… I used GPT to create, like, the visualization, so I went with it.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Audio… so audio, you think about a song, or the recording of this lecture, can be broken down into different frames.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And each frame can be considered as 1 out of N.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: steps in the sequence.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: By the way, not just audio, but also video. All this… also, the video of this sector can be broken down into frames.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Or different types of, of chunks.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And there are… they have, the x-axis as the time.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: A time series. A time series is also a sequence, so think about stalks, think about a heart monitor, EEG, those are also sequences.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: DNA. DNA is a special sequence made out of, four, Tokens!
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Emm… And more and more and more and more, okay? So there are a lot of, sequences.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: what is the characteristics of sequential data? Usually, they will have Some sort of vocabulary?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, if it's a text, we talked about it a lot.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: But if it's, for example,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Audio, it can be, phonetics.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And if it's, DNA, it's the types of,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: characters that are in the DNA.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Sometimes they are time-dependent, So, for instance, audio, video, stocks, and every… a lot of time series…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Localities, so a location of a certain
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: member of the sequence is important. So, a word, if it's at the beginning of the sentence or at the end, or if we're looking at stocks prices, the location of the stock price
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Within the time series is also important.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And a long-distance relation. So sometimes, for example, in the sentence, we want to know the end of the sentence reflects to something that was said at the beginning of the sentence.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Or, if I'm looking at the DNA, the relations is not just local, it's throughout the whole DNA.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So this is something else we want to capture when we're looking at sequences.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And this is a reminder of how we dealt with sequences last time, so we talked about concatenation, and concatenation, and adding it to the autoencoder. We talked about pooling, and we said we could do better, and now I'll show you how.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And what we will use for sequences today is called recurrent Neural Network.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: What does it do? It takes a sequence of various lengths and outputs a vector of a constant size.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Emm… And at the end, you can think about it as a function that takes
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: vectors… sorry, sequences of size n.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And maps them into a vector of a predefined size.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: whether it's DNA, text, Or time series.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And this is how RNN looks like, okay?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, what is so special about RNN? Let's look at its formula. It takes two inputs. One is X. X is our…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: a raw input, So, our token…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: tokens 1 to N, so we have a sequence of N tokens.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: An initial state zero.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: What does it do?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: it's equal to the… sorry, the output of… the final output of the RNN will give me the final state and the final output.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And how does each state and output look like? A state is the function of the previous state
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And the input at this specific state.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And the output is the output on the specific state itself. So let's look at the diagram here.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: My input is XI, so for example, in our sense…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: is raining, let's say, if now I'm at I1, it's the word is… And the previous state.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Is everything that we got from the EATH token.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: and the output of Xi Is, some f- some function on… The current state here.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So this is a recursive unit.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Whose length is defined by the sequence length.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: With some parameters.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Notice that those parameters are joint.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: for all of our N tokens.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, let's try to understand it better. First of all, we said that the state is a function on the previous state and the input token.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And the output is some function on the state.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, what do those functions usually look like? For example… so, for example.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: a tan H, so I can say that they are theta.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Is some parameters theta times the previous state, plus some other parameters theta times the specific token.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And the output of this state is parameters times the state output.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, usually, this is how the functions of O and L look like.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: M… And… How does it look like, for example, for a sequence of 5 tokens?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, let's say our tokens are eat, is, rain, ing, period, okay? So this is our 5 tokens. It is raining, period.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: S0 is our initial state, I'll soon explain what we put here.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And now, the token eat… goes through My teenage ear.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: To provide the next state.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: The Stan H, what did it take as an input? S0 and X1.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And the Y one here takes… as an input, S1,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And let's move to the ease.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: is, takes, sorry, S2 takes as an input S1 and X2.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And Y2 takes as an input S2.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And… So on and so forth.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And TS5 here, and Y5 here, Y5 here, that represent the full sequence. Why does it represent the full sequence? Because it's…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: took as an input the previous step, which looked at the previous step, which looked at the previous step, and so on, until I get back to S0.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: M… the in S0 here, One second…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: in, what is stage 0? So I can leave it empty.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Or I can provide some certain context
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: in S0. So, for example, this…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: if I want a certain type or a certain,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: context that is before the sentence, I can plug it in here as well, but forget it for now if it's confusing.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Mmm…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Notice, again, that here I spread it out as if there are five RNN units. It's just one. The thetas in the formula that I showed you before, theta HH, theta XH, and theta HY.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: They are common across all the 5 tokens, okay? So we have 3…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Matrices that are common across all 5 tokens.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Emm… How does information pass from one to another? By…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Getting as an input the previous state.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Okay, and with this current neural network architecture, we can build a lot of very interesting
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: sub-architectures, I would say.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: One is called accepto. What does Accepto mean? For example, let's say for text classification, our sentiment analysis
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: From a sentiment classification from last time.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We can use the final output here.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: As an input to…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: let's say, an MLP, a linear layer, that will, at the end, do a classification task.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Why do I look at the final output here? Because it encapsulates all the previous tokens to it.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, in Accepto, I don't care about the outputs in the middle.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I don't care about them. I don't care about the Y1 here, Y2 here, Y3 here. I only care about the final output of the sequence of it is raining.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And the final output here, I can now have a representation of a fixed size.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Determined by the size of theta.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: that I can plug into an MLP, a linear layer.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And at the end, have my cross entropy with classification.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: One second… And I'll pause soon for questions, because your face is so confused.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Okay, I'll pause now, okay. Yes?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yes, of course.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So R is a function that maps the input X and the previous state, Into…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: the representation of the next state, okay? So R is the function that creates the new state.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Oh!
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Is a function that maps the input.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Sorry, that maps the next state into… A Y.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: For example, I showed you an example, there can be a lot of things, and they are different for, for example, in LSTM, those who heard about it, but let's make it simple, because
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: what exactly is within R and O, it's not that important.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: But, for example, R here can be tanh that receives the previous state.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: and X.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And how does it manipulate them? Just like we learned with logistic regression, it multiplies them by some parameters.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: That are learnable, We have some nonlinearity on top of it, so nothing that you haven't learned before.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: OAS, for example, is…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: some other parameter multiplied by the new state. And this gives me a representation of the output of this specific step.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Again, here you can apply nonlinearity, you can do everything…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Here, it doesn't have to be a linear combination between the two.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Etetas.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, this is just an example, but what's important for me that you remember, there is one function that is learnable that maps the previous state and the input into a new state.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And there is another learnable function that maps the state into an output.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: That's all you need to understand.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: and, we were at the acceptor, architecture.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I, yeah, one more question, and then I'll continue. Yes.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, I'll get there, okay?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: okay, so… This is his question.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Another architecture is not accepto, so accepto maybe is more trivial. I want to embed, remember the verb embed, to represent the full sequence in some sophisticated way.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And then, at the end, I want to say something about that sequence. This is maybe more trivial, but sometimes we have a need for an architecture called transducer. When do we need a transducer?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I'll start with a simple example of ner and part of speech. What is nere and part of speech? It's two tasks in NLP. NER wants me to identify the named entities within the text. What are named entities? For example, names of person, names of entities such as companies.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Microsoft, Nebius, Apple.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, in order to identify entity, I want to say for each token whether there are an entity or not.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, I want an output for each token, Entity or not.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: part of speech… part of speech is a different classification task, that for every token, I want to say if it's a verb, if it's a noun, if it's a pronoun, if it's a punctuation.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And yet again, I want for every token in my text to have the relevant output.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, transducer is very useful if your task is to label each one of those tokens, plus a very special case that we're very interested in this class, a language model. Why?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Let me show you.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And because now, thanks to the architecture of RNN, we are no longer
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: to Markovian models, remember our first silly language model?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So we're not tied to it anymore. We have the ability, every time.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: To, predict the next word based on the previous step.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And once we have predicted the next word.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: put it as an input to our next generator. So, let's see how the generator RNN model looks like.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I have S0, let's neglect it for now. I'll get to it once we are feeling more comfortable.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: and a token of start of the sentence, given the token of start of the sentence, I now have the next state, which tells me what I saw so far, and a prediction of the next token, and I predicted the token the.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Now the token there goes as an input to my next step in the RNN,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And the token there receives as a step.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: as a previous step, the fact that the S star token was seen, and now it predicts black
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And in the third step here, now black.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: is going as an input to the next step here. It sees S2. S2, what did it capture?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Start token, and the.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And it predicts now the word FOX. Fox goes as an input, and until when? When do we stop?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Until we see the end token, okay, so once we predicted the end token, we know to stop.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, a very special case of transucer.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Architecture is to generate language, so a generative use case of RNN.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: M… Why do you…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: root of the Markovian assumption, because now our assumption, that in every state, for example, S3, we capture all the meaning of everything that came before. How did you capture it? By using our all function, our learned all function.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Okay?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: M…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, a common… what did I want to say here? I don't remember.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, common language models with RNN,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: It can be either forward or an N.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I'm go… I'm predicting the next word.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: In the sentence… or backward, and I'm starting from the end of the sentence and predicting The initial word.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Notice that R& has a direction.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Okay, it has an order.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I'll always predict the next, or the… or the… previous token.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: With transformers, we'll see… We're not tied to it anymore.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And by the way, you can do both ways. You can try to predict the next token, and the previous token, and optimize on both of them, we'll get there.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Slowly.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Another super important RRNN architecture is called encoder, decoder.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: What is so special about this architecture? It has two sides.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: The acceptor we saw before, which encodes the original input.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And the transducer we saw before, which decodes this input into a generative new output.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: When is it useful? For example, language translation?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So let's say I want to translate, hello, world, descendants in English, to… Bonjour, le monde.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Sentence, same sentence, in French.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: What do I do?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I want now, in an ex… for example, in an acceptor architecture, So the final state here…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I can pass it now to the decoder here.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And this decoder here, goes back to…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: This architecture we now saw. So, S0 here would be the input from the encoder.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: A stout token will be kind of embedded into our start.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And we'll start to predict
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: the next token and put it as an input until we reach the end of the second token to produce
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: A new sentence in a different language.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: This encoder-decoder architecture is not only for language translation, it's for any generation of text. So, for example, text summarization. I want to take a full text, encode it, and now put it in a summarized format.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: For example, tone, change, so I want to take a text, make it more slang, or more, formal.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I can also do that.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: M… And this is our sequence, sequence architecture, which is,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Quite… quite useful for language translation.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: notice that RNNs, we talked about RNNs that are shallow, meaning I only had Three parameters.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I can have deep RNNs. What do I mean by deep R&S? Instead.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: of why would… to give me the final output, per token?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Why not have several layers?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We can also have it bidirectional. Instead of just going to predict the next token, why not predict both ways?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And then concatenate it Two directions and give
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: an MLP here that will give me the final output.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Okay… And now I'll show the code, and then I'll pause for questions.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, how does it look with PyTorch?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Very simple.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: This is specifically for the RNN we saw using TANH
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: As I told you, those R and O functions.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: They can be anything. There is a specific RNN that was the state of the art with photons form as.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: which was called LSTM.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And it looked differently, it looked very weird, and we won't learn it in our class, because
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We moved forward for me.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: But the idea of RNN is important. So it doesn't really matter the function itself, but let's go with the simple thing we saw. So we have
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: 3… Matrices of parameters that are learned, that we are going to learn through the training process.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Mmm… Now, we have the forward pass with the batch size and the sequence length.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We start with a zeroed metrics of the state.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And for every state, we calculate the new state according to
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: The input of this step.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And the previous output of the previous state.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Times the parameters that we want to learn.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And why we apply theta on
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: the HY on the state itself.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And here, the unsqueezing and concatenating is just to align the dimensions, because here we are breaking it down into timestamps.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And at the end, we want to aggregate it back.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Let's forget about.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Now, something that I didn't emphasize, and I want to ask you, What is the label here?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: In each one of the cases we saw.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, the label in this case, what is it?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: the sentiment, right? We said it's a sentiment analysis case, so it…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Here, the label is whether the sentiment is positive or negative, so think at the end of exactly the logistic regression we saw, but what comes before that logistic regression, and in the gradient descent we will update are the tetas of the RNN as well.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: In the… in this case, let's say, narrow part of speech, what is the labor?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yeah, let's say if, whether it's an entity or not, for each one of the tokens, okay? So here I have a label for each one of the tokens.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And in the language model, what is the labor?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: The next word, right? So here, Y1 tries to predict duh, and here Y2 tries to predict
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Black, if this is the true sentence that we're training on, okay?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: M… That's it. Now questions.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yes.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: This one?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Okay, so I… great. So, when did we use S0? Who remembers in which architecture?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Translation. In encoder, decoder, we used S0.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: To pass as an input.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: the original sentences we want to decode. So the English sentence, we embedded it in a way that now we pass this as an input.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: But it's not the only use case for S0. What other use cases of S0 can be?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: the context. So, for example, the style of the sentence.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: It's something that you can try to learn the embedding for.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: For example, a style slang, or forma, and then put it as an input to generate a specific style.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Maybe I'm jumping a little bit, but it's also a way you can use the S0. In our case, in the code, we just zeroed this S0, because we didn't have something smarter to say here.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Can you explain again the question?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So the question is, where does the tokenization come in? And the tokenization comes in the fact that my sequence is split now.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: into the tokens based on the tokenization method I chose. And also, the generated output is based on the tokens I chose, but S0 here.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: At least let's stick to the example we saw, so I don't overcomplicate things.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: S0 here is the hidden state I received from the full RNN,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: That embedded my full sequence of tokens.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So the representation here is no longer just one token, it's the full representation of the tokens.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: More questions? Yes.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: What is the size of S?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I want to bring this question back to you by showing it this slide.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: this slide, sorry, what is the size of S?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, the size of X, we're kind of stuck from what we chose when we did the tokenization, right?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: The size of X we predefined in the tokenization process. Remember when we learned about embedding? We defined the size there. We were stuck with it. But notice that the size H
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: What is it? It's a hyperparameter that we now define. What size it will be?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: whether S will be…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: hundreds, or less than hundreds. It's, again, a hyperparameter, and we already know that we need to test a few to see what works best in our setup.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Same goes for the output size, okay?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, we're stuck now with the size of S,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: But we can choose any size for Y. We will want to map it back to the size of our labeled Y,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So again, the token size here, if we're looking at non-binary outputs, like the part of speech or na, are binding our Y size. And we also see it in the code.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Let's go back to the cone.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: that XH is input DIM and a hidden DIM, That we now defined.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: HH is the same hidden DM, and HY is defined by the output dimension.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, whenever you're confused with neural networks, follow the dimensions, and it will make Your life, easier.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I just want to see questions in the Slack.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: The Q&A, sorry.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Okay, thank you.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And… Where was forward-moving and backward-moving RNN used? In what cases? So, before transformer.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: the state of the art of a large language model, and in many additional NFB tasks.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: was a bidirectional LSTM. So we said LSTM is a…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: specific use case over an RNN, and a bi-directional one. Why? Because
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Why not? You can capture much more information by looking at both directions.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And in Transformer, we will see, we just want to look at
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: All directions, like, why limit myself to just a forward pass or a backward pass?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: if I have the possibility to look both ways.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Why, for now, we do…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Loss based on sum of all tokens, and not one position.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Emm… Okay, great.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Great question, so let me explain it better.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: As we said, for now, we are using the… oh, move it.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We're using the transducer architecture.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And at the end, we have…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: as we said, we have, in this case, 5 Ys of the predicted output, and we have 5 Ys of the actual outputs. And we compare Y1 to Y hat1, Y2 to 1…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Y had 2. But at the end, it's the sum of all the five losses. I mean, you need to aggregate it somewhat how to calculate the final loss, and the final loss will be the distance between all of them.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So it's actually,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: how you aggregate, I would say, all the comparisons, but each Y is compared to its own Y.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: M… Okay, one more question from the audience, and then we'll continue. Yes.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, the question is, can you… Paralyze… the… the… training?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: This is the question?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So… You… Just work with batch size, so instead of… A single… oops.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Instead of a single input token every time here, you have a matrix.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: of multiple tokens. It's true that once you do batch sizes, you still need to pad with zeros the sequences that are shorter than the maximum length of sequence, because you trained them
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: together, so… It's something I tried to hide, but now I expose it. Yes?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Ugh.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So the input depends on the previous output. How can you parallelize it? This was the question. The input depends on the previous output. You cannot… you cannot, you don't par… we said it's one unit, it's one parameter, so you learn it all at once.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: It's not, it's not that those are different parameters.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, maybe in the code it will be clearer.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: This is my forward pass, and if you remember from our previous PyTorch code, we had an optimizer, and we had to take a step in the backpropagate… to backpropagate. When we backpropagate here.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: The parameters of thetaXH, theta HH, and theta HY are updated all at once.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: If it's a batch size according to the full batch size, but let's still stick for simplicity to one document or one sentence, then they're all updated at the same backpropagation.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Emm… I hope it answered the question.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Okay, so, now let's take a break until 11.30, and at 11.30, we'll talk about the attention mechanism.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, before the break, we talked about canonization, we talked about record neural networks, and now we'll discuss the attention mechanism.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: That arrived soon after recurrent neural networks.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And it tries to focus on the problem that occurred with RNNs.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And it will follow us to, next week in the transformer lesson.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: M… So…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: At the end, what we did with RNNs, whether it was the acceptor or transducer architecture, we combined different outputs to a single vector, so whether it was,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We could… we didn't do it, but we could have done it in the middle…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: On all steps, or we… we just took… The one at the end?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And, there is this famous quote with the…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: with curses in the middle of Ray money, is, like, famous for it, that it's very hard to capture the whole meaning of the sentence in one single vector, because
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Although we are passing the state from one, step to another.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: It's very, very hard to focus on which information is important for my current
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: problem, and which information is maybe not so useful. So think about the language model, where I try to predict the next token.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Maybe sometimes focusing at the beginning of the sentence is what I need now in order to predict the next token, and maybe focusing on other part of the sentence is what I need. Or if I'm doing,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Sentiment analysis, So,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: it's not always that I want to focus on the same area.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So the idea is, why not use multiple vectors to represent the same sentence? So instead of have just one representation of the sentence, to use multiple vectors to do it.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And… For example, in our, language model.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Where we try to predict the next token.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We had the student open there.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And we hope that this representation will capture all the information about the students open there. Think about a very, very, very long sentence where you have already
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: A lot of tokens that you want to hold the information on.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: You might lose on the important information.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And the solution is to have a single query vector and multiple key vectors.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And to score differently each key and query pair.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: What do I mean by that?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, think about now the acceptor-transducer architecture, or what we call the encoder-decoder.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: to, sorry, this is the transducer architecture, it's just generating a sentence, it's not translation. And now, the token that I'm predicting is books.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And this is the hidden state at the current timestamp, so at the current… I'm now at state 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: If I start index zero sum at state 4. And, I want now to have a representation of this hidden state here.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: the… what we called Y.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Emm… And the idea says that given the input books, so this is X4.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I now want this output here
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: to be impacted, but by directly what earlier? And how do I do it directly?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I do a dot product with all the keys, which are the encoded hidden states from before.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And this is what I call the attention score.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, instead, of just… looking at… the,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: input here, so if you remember our RNN function, it looked at the previous stay, And add the input.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: That's it. I want to also look at
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: the raw data, not the raw data, because I'm looking at the Y's from… the hidden states from before.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And specifically for this query here, to know which one of them mattered and at what scale to the representation of this hidden state at this timestamp.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, how do I do that?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: after… Go back after.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I multiplied the query, which was the hidden state at the current timestamp.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I multiplied it by the attention scores.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Of the hidden states before.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I have a dot product between them.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I'm now applying a softmax in order to get a distribution. Remember that we apply softmax when we want a number that ranges between 0 and 1, and the sum of all of it to be 1, to have probabilities.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: so that I know which hidden state Impacted the most The hidden representation of books.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So you can see in the mock example here that
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: the hidden representation of the received
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Much higher attention, much higher weight.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: when I wanted to capture the hidden representation of books.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Let's look… Sorry, and… and… After having the distribution here.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We can calculate the weighted average of the hidden states.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And intuitively, we can say that the resulting attention output contains the information from the hidden states that receive the higher attention scores.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Okay, so I'm not just counting on the previous state, To capture a general meaning.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Because now I want the meaning specifically For the new input books.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So let's do some questions to see if you understood.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, the representation of books here, what is it composed of, eventually?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: First of all, the input, okay?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So the input of the token books… the previous… state…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: The attention output, so how much weight
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: should I put on all those hidden states here?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Let's see it in another,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: In another… this was language generation. Let's see it in the language translation example.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, here I have translation between English to a language I don't know, maybe someone knows what it is, sorry. So, I have, I hate.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Sorry, this is the original language.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Someone knows what this language is? Japanese? Yeah, I was going to say, but I'm not sure. So, Japanese, and I want to translate it to English. So, this is my input.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And now, I started generating already the translation I hate.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And I want to have the best representation possible for the word hate.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So… I calculate the attention.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: for each one of those key vectors, how do I do it? I multiply the hidden representation of heat
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: With each one of those key vectors.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Now I want to get probabilities, so I pass those numbers through a softbox, and here I get the relevant alphas that will sum up to 1.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And how I represent the final, hidden state.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: By multiplying each one of those key vectors.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: sorry, value vectors with the,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Broken?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: M… Let me move it, because this formula is important to me. So, in… in this step.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We, what we did was to multiply the query vector with the key vector, and we normalize it by the key size, but it's not really interesting.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And we obtain these values here.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We applied softmax, and in order to get the final vector representation, what did we do?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We multiply it by the values of each one of those vectors.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, the query indicates Where am I at now with the decoder step, or the generative step?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: The key vectors are all the previous hidden states.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: By multiplying them and passing it through softmax, I get the attention head.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I get the… sorry, the weights of the attention, and by multiplying the values with the weights of the attention, I get the final representation.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: What does this do? Again?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: It means that for the word hate.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I… it mattered to me much more the word kono in Japanese.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: In order to generate this word. But maybe for the word I, the word that mattered to me more was JA, because this is more related to it.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And then the representation of I will be much… impacted… By the relevant key.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We can take all of these attention values, And plot them.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And this plot of attention can give us a hint
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: to what mattered more? Let's say, for example, in the translation. So we have
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: The agreement on the European Economic Areas was signed in August 1992.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And same sentence in French, la course sur la zone economique etropen a ete signier en hot tschemystein.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And now… what's important, for example, you can see that ACO, the agreement.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: it was very important for the… let's say we translated from English to French, okay? So it was very important
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: In order to generate this translation, the focus was on the value of agreement.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: For zone, so, you can see that the area
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: was most influential in the representation of zone.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: what, European, so you can see that European in English, and European were,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: It was mostly impacted by the token European.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Signed and signed, so it, it, it helps you
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Focus on the relevant part of the sequence.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: In order to generate or translate in our example.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Instead of just counting on the previous state.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: to capture some general representation of everything that was before, because when I… I now want to translate an area.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, of course.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: sorry, I want to create the word zone, because I'm from English to French. So, of course, whatever came before doesn't really matter to me. Like, it's just confusing. But if I now want to translate…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: 1992, then, again, everything that was before doesn't really matter, so we don't want just the previous
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: step to be something general. We wanted to adapt
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: According to where we are now in our task.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And this is the power that attention gives me. It gives me the ability not to have just one representation, but to have a representation for each step of the sequence.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And it's a very, very powerful Tour?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And it really, really improved performance of everything.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And also, one might say that it provides some sort of explanation of revealing the black box of what's happening behind the scene.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And here I can tell you that it's partially true, because there was a paper, attention is explanation, and then came a paper at… no, attention is not explanation, and then came a paper, attention is not, not explanation, and there is this huge debate whether it's an explanation method or not.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: But… Putting the explanation stuff aside, you can understand how powerful it is in terms of performance.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Because every time we look at something,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Very particular to where we are now at our task.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: M… Questions, yeah.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yes.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yeah.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yeah, yeah, go, go ahead.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yeah, same, absolutely.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Can you repeat the question, please? Yes.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Depends on… Jason, then you can see when it was… What's the special occasion?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Bye.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I accept.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Mmm… I'm not sure I fully understood, but again.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I'm reminding you, maybe that will help.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: that…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I talked here about the generative part of the models, but when we train those models, it's all at once.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So I have all the forward data as well.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And those attention key queries vectors.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We will see, next week.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: That they also will have parameters that will be learned all at once.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: That's good.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I think this one correctly.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, the question was whether, if this was correct, it will adjust the attention for the future tokens.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: if I understood correctly, then, yes, like, the… the… the… at the end, Remember that the value here
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: It's composed of the representations of each one of those keys.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And those representations are learned. They're learned by multiplying the parameters we spoke about earlier, so it all goes back to the same
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: M, loss function that derives those parameters based on How we use the attention.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yes.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So the question is, if we do encoder-decoder.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Can we, instead of a supervised setup, do encoder, decoder, encoder, and compare that the inputs are the same?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: But if you don't have the supervised layer for the decoder.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: it might be gibberish that you find in the middle, if I understood your question correctly.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: If you just have the… the input…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: then nothing promises that your decoder will be in a valid language. At the end, when we decoded, we used the supervised setup. Remember, we compared the predicted Ys to the actual Ys.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Got it. But why not just flip the data?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Maybe let's take this question offline, because I don't really… Yes.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Okay.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So… Let's seat again here.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So the… at the end, the query is the hidden state.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: The keys are the encoder hidden state.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And the values are before the hidden state. Maybe I forgot to write it here.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: But yeah, but the va… at the end.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: These are applied on the hidden state.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: output, so the Ys that we said before.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And the values here are the original embedding for the tokens.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, at the X level, But it depends. Sometimes you would want, if you have multiple layers, for instance.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So you can also take some middle hidden stay, and the final output of the… Emm…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Of the fuel layer state as your output.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Oh, yes.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, no, the key vectors…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: will be everything that was proceeding to the current state you're at. So, in RNN, we said that we have a direction.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, everything that came before the query vector now, if you're in a forward RNN,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: will be your key vectors. If you're in a backward RNN, then the other way around. Everything that came
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: From the end of the sentence until the point you are now.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: are your key vectors. And as we said, the key vectors are the hidden state from the encoder. So.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, every… if you're looking at the generative setup, then yes, but if you're in the training phase.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And you're looking at the text all at once.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Then you can think about the attention mechanism altogether, but yeah, every time you kind of cut it into the point you're at now, according to the direction of the network.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Let me just look at the questions in the room.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Where was forward-moving and backward-moving RNN used?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: In what case?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yeah, I think we answered it. Okay, so more questions in the class.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Last one? Yes.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So… Dimensions of what? Can you repeat the question?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: the state, Whether it's a matrix, that…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Grow apartment?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: No, no, so the question was whether the state dimensions change over time.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And let me go back to the relevant slide, just… So… We are aligned.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So at the end, the dimensions of the state are defined by H here, the size of H here.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: and the hidden state from before. When we are doing the special case of transducer that we generate language, let's go back to that.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We are doing a special setup That every time We kind of…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: pause the model until now. We predict the relevant token.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So we try that the and Y1 will be as similar as possible, and then we put as an input the token that was predicted, but it doesn't mean that the state size here
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: has changed. It's still a fixed size.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Don't sound…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: The attention in that matrix That's your…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, no, let's look at the size of the attention now.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Here.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, as you can see, at the end, my attention output is of a fixed size, because I do pulling. It's a special… remember pulling? It's a special kind of pulling, because it's not…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: max pooling or mean pooling. It's a pulling that depends On the inputs themselves.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: But I get a vector of a fixed size. Okay.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: The weight of the attention scores?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yeah, so the attention scores are really much dependent on the query, right? How did we get the attention scores?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We multiplied the query by all of the key elements, and therefore, that's the whole idea of attention, that the query really impacts
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: The value of those attention heads.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Okay?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: How many keys?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So the question is, how many keys can we calculate with the attention?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: If I understood.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yeah, so, so… Yes.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: You do the whole process?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Then you have that… the word of… Something that… Bye.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: I think you are confusing the training part and the inference part.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: In the training part, we have the full dataset, so…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: we have all… it's true that we're breaking it down into steps in the training data, but we have everything at once. In the inference, we always look at what we have up until now, and we calculate the relevant attention
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Let me continue, and then we'll pause for more. I don't think there is much more, so…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yeah, okay. Yes.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: One lower.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Bye.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So the question is, what if the attention heads are very, very small?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: the values.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: What if the values are very, very small, so that the output
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Got it, okay. So the question is, what if the values
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: are not normalized, I would say. Let…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yeah, so that… it goes to my answer, that usually when you create token embeddings, or what we said last time, word embeddings, you make sure that they're normalized, that they're, between… their sizes is between 0 and 1, so a vector has a size
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yeah, but if you normalize
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: all the vectors to range between 0 and 1, then you have already got rid of a lot of problems that could happen if one vector is of size 10K and another vector is of size 1. But yeah, it's still… but that's the whole point. We're trying to
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: given how the tokens are represented, because remember, the attention head is calculated by looking at their representation. So given how they're represented, what should be their scale? And you assume that those
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Alphas, or the unnormalized alphas, will take it into account, will take into account the fact that maybe this vector is very small, and therefore it needs more representation.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yes.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So I don't want to go through advanced methods just yet. I prefer
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: that everything we saw today sits, correctly. I thought I had a code example, so I'm surprised.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: It's not here, sorry,
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Don't know why, I did have it at home, but maybe I didn't upload it.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, I, I will, I will send it to you as well after today.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yes, more questions? I'll take, like, 3 more, and then… Well, Summer. Yes?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yeah, wow.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: 46, yes.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yeah, yeah, waiting for the previous day.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: 1… Hi, nope.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Exactly, so instead of just looking at this ball…
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We're now building a newer presentation that takes into account Y1 up until Y4.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: No, the Y's. These are our keys. And we multiply it by jumped here, and then we have a representation that takes into account the Y's and the jump.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And this is what we'll use
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: as our Y5 in order to predict the next token.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Yeah, weighted average according to… The input, that we currently have.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: More questions?
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Okay, so, I think we'll summarize, and then I'll stay here since we finished a bit early.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Mmm… So let's see what we saw and what we're about to see next week.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: So, from now on, we will only work at token level, and we learned three types of tokenization, BPE, wordpiece, and sentence piece.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: We saw that RNN architectures are very good with sequences.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: They're no longer the state of the art, and we will learn next week about the transformer architecture, which is now the COBL method for sequences.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Attention mechanism is useful to make RNN architecture's performance better.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And attention is another building block that we will need for transformers.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: And all those are building blocks for Transformin, which is next week.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Also, next week we'll have
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: two lessons, so we'll talk about Tuesday about transformers, and then you'll see me again Friday, and we'll talk about how we train large language models.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: M… And, yeah, that's it.
AI-PE | Nebius Academy: Please provide feedback.